CONSOLE-4448: Add the ability to specify a second custom logo for PatternFly 6 (#1753)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/console/custom-logos.md

---
title: custom-logos
authors:
  - "@cajieh"
reviewers:
  - "@jhadvig "
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@everettraven"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2025-02-11
last-updated: 2025-02-11
---

# Custom Logos

## Summary

> The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console is currently being upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). Consequently, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes. 

Reviewer: Lets mention the upgrade in the past tense. 
```suggestion
The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console was upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes. 
```

Add the ability to specify custom logos to support light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon.

## Background info

> The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console is currently being upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). Consequently, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both modes.

Reviewer: same as Summary section

To address this, we need to allow users to add custom logos for both the masthead and favicon that are compatible with light and dark themes. This ensures that the logos are always visible and aesthetically pleasing, regardless of the theme mode.

The custom logos feature will enable users to specify different logos for the masthead and favicon based on the theme mode. This will involve exposing a new API endpoint to support custom logos for both light and dark themes.

## Motivation

> The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console is currently being upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). Consequently, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes. This is evident with the existing OKD and OpenShift logos, which assume a dark masthead background and include white text.

Reviewer: same as above...

I would suggest to:

Summary
The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console is being upgraded to PatternFly 6, which introduces a masthead color that changes based on the selected theme mode (light or dark). As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both modes, potentially affecting visibility and aesthetics.

Motivation
The existing OKD and OpenShift logos are designed for a dark masthead background and include white text, making them less effective in a light theme. To ensure logos remain visible and visually appealing in both light and dark themes, users need the ability to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that adapt to the theme mode. To support this, a new API endpoint will be introduced, allowing users to specify different logos for light and dark themes.

### User Stories

> * As an OpenShift web console user, I want to be able to add custom logos for light and dark theme modes in the masthead and favicon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As an OpenShift web console user, I want to be able to add different custom logos for light and dark theme modes in the masthead and favicon.
```

### Goals

This feature should allow users to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that are compatible with both light and dark theme modes in the OpenShift web console.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

├── spec
│   ├── customization
│       ├── customLogos
│           ├── type
│           ├── themes
│               ├── type
│               ├── file
│                   ├── key
│                   ├── name
└── ...

### Risks and Mitigations

1. Users could set both the `CustomLogoFile` and `CustomLogos` APIs. The `CustomLogos` API configuration will take precedence over the old `CustomLogoFile` field.

> 2. If only the dark or light theme is specified, the default OCP logo will be used for the unspecified theme.

Reviewer: I would rephrase this to:
Each of the Console supported themes can be configured individually by setting either the `Light` or `Dark` theme type or by applying a default theme to all supported themes using the `Default` theme type. If the `Default` theme type is set along with a specific `Dark` or `Light` theme, the specific theme setting will override the default one.

3. Handling different custom logos for light and dark themes may increase the complexity of the backend and UI logic. Tests are added to validate the new  logic and a fallback is implemented to default to the OCP logo if any theme is missing.

4. Users might experience confusion with the introduction of new logo configuration options, especially if they are familiar with the old method, which may soon be deprecated. Provide a comprehensive documentation and tools that guide users through the transition. Include clear instructions about the changes and their benefits.

> ### Drawbacks

Reviewer: remove

N/A

> ## API Design Details

Reviewer: lets move this subsection into the `Proposal` section.

##Proposal
### API Design Details

The configuration for custom logos will include support for both masthead and favicon types, with separate files for light and dark themes:

```yaml
customLogos:
  - type: Masthead
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: logo-light.svg
          name: masthead-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: logo-dark.svg
          name: masthead-logo-dark
  - type: Favicon
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:

>           key: favicon-light.ico

Reviewer: lets use .png in the example since we are recommending it in the API change.
```suggestion
          key: favicon-light.png
```

also below

          name: favicon-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: favicon-dark.ico
          name: favicon-logo-dark
```

### Attributes Description

#### customLogos
- `type`: Enumerate which specifies the type of custom logo. Available custom logo types are `Masthead` and `Favicon`.
- `themes`: A list of themes for which the custom logo is defined.

#### themes
- `type`: Enumerate which specifies the type of theme. Available theme types are `Light`, `Dark` and `Default`.
- `file`: Contains the file details for the custom logo.

#### file
- `key`: The key or path to the custom logo file.
- `name`: The name of the ConfigMap containing the custom logo file.

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer: Lets list tests which we will deliver:
- unit tests in the API repo
- unit and e2e tests in the console-operator repo
- e2e tests in the console repo

> ### Graduation Criteria

Reviewer: this will be needed only if we will be forced to put the API behind feature gate. And since technically this is API change is addressing a bug, lets remove it 🤞

Author: > Please also remove the unused sections below

It seems removing the unused sections causes lint tests to fail - https://prow.ci.openshift.org/view/gs/test-platform-results/pr-logs/pull/openshift_enhancements/1753/pull-ci-openshift-enhancements-master-markdownlint/1892575902089351168

## Motivation

The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console is currently being upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). Consequently, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both modes. This is evident with the existing OKD and OpenShift logos, which assume a dark masthead background and include white text.

### User Stories

* As an OpenShift web console user, I want to be able to add custom logos for light and dark theme modes in the masthead and favicon.

### Goals

This feature should allow users to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that are compatible with both light and dark theme modes in the OpenShift web console.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

├── spec
│   ├── customization
│       ├── customLogos
│           ├── type
│           ├── themes
│               ├── type
│               ├── file
│                   ├── key
│                   ├── name
└── ...

### Risks and Mitigations

1. Users could set both the `CustomLogoFile` and `CustomLogos` APIs. When both APIs are set. 

> To mitigate this challenge, the `CustomLogos` API configuration will take precedence over the old `CustomLogoFile` field.

Reviewer 2: You could use CEL validation on the parent type to prevent both those fields from being set.

```yaml
customLogos:
  - type: Masthead
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: logo-light.svg
          name: masthead-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: logo-dark.svg
          name: masthead-logo-dark
  - type: Favicon
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: favicon-light.ico
          name: favicon-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: favicon-dark.ico
          name: favicon-logo-dark
```

### Attributes Description

#### customLogos
- `type`: Enumerate which specifies the type of custom logo. Available custom logo types are `Masthead` and `Favicon`.
- `themes`: A list of themes for which the custom logo is defined.

#### themes
- `type`: Enumerate which specifies the type of theme. Available theme types are `Light` and `Dark`.
- `file`: Contains the file details for the custom logo.

#### file
- `key`: The key or path to the logo file.
- `name`: The name identifier for the custom logo.

### Test Plan

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

> The current custom logo feature is deprecated and will be removed at some point in the future. Users are encouraged to transition to the new custom logo configuration that supports light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon.

Reviewer 3: It's not clear to me what API tier our operator config is, but I wouldn't expect us to remove the deprecated field anytime soon. It's not a huge burden to support both. If it's tier 1, we aren't able to remove it until the next major version.

https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/rest_api/overview/understanding-api-support-tiers.html

## Motivation

The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console is currently being upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). Consequently, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both modes. This is evident with the existing OKD and OpenShift logos, which assume a dark masthead background and include white text.

### User Stories

* As an OpenShift web console user, I want to be able to add custom logos for light and dark theme modes in the masthead and favicon.

### Goals

This feature should allow users to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that are compatible with both light and dark theme modes in the OpenShift web console.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

├── spec
│   ├── customization
│       ├── customLogos
│           ├── type
│           ├── themes
│               ├── type
│               ├── file
│                   ├── key
│                   ├── name
└── ...

> ### API Extensions

Author: I left this section and other NA sections to make `make lint` happy.:)

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer: Lets describe here how the new API will co-exist with the old one - `CustomLogoFile` field.... meaning what happens when both are set ? What happens when only a single theme is set for a custom logo ? What shall be the behaviour?

#### The OpenShift Console is optional and could be disabled

### Drawbacks

## API Design Details

The configuration for custom logos will include support for both masthead and favicon types, with separate files for light and dark themes:

```yaml
customLogos:
  - type: Masthead
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: logo-light.png
          name: masthead-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: logo-dark.png
          name: masthead-logo-dark
  - type: Favicon
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: favicon-light.ico
          name: favicon-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: favicon-dark.ico
          name: favicon-logo-dark
```

### Attributes Description

#### customLogos
- `type`: Specifies the type of logo. Possible values are `Masthead` and `Favicon`.
- `themes`: A list of themes for which the custom logo is defined.

#### themes
- `type`: Specifies the theme type. Possible values are `Light` and `Dark`.
- `file`: Contains the file details for the custom logo.

#### file
- `key`: The key or path to the logo file.
- `name`: The name identifier for the custom logo.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be also good a proposal for the console-config API field, to align on the structure.

Author: > I think it would be also good a proposal for the console-config API field, to align on the structure.

I think I understand this comment, please clarify?

### Test Plan

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

> #### Removing a deprecated feature

Reviewer: Here we should mentions the deprecated field align if we want to remove it at some point

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> ### Version Skew Strategy

Reviewer: This section could be removed.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

#### Failure Modes

N/A

#### Support Procedures

N/A

> ## Implementation History

Reviewer: This section could be removed.

          from: ConfigMap
          configMap:
            name: custom-logos-config
            key: masthead-light-logo.svg
      - mode: Dark
        source:
          from: ConfigMap
          configMap:
            name: custom-logos-config
            key: masthead-dark-logo.svg
  - type: Favicon
    themes:
      - mode: Light
        source:
          from: ConfigMap
          configMap:
            name: custom-logos-config
            key: favicon-light-logo.png
      - mode: Dark
        source:
          from: ConfigMap
          configMap:
            name: custom-logos-config
            key: favicon-dark-logo.png
```

### Workflow Description

├── spec
│   ├── customization
│       ├── logos
│           ├── type
│           ├── themes
│               ├── mode
│               ├── source
│                   ├── from
│                   ├── configMap
│                       ├── name
│                       ├── key
└── ...

### Risks and Mitigations

1. Each of the Console supported theme modes can be configured individually by setting either the Light or Dark theme mode. If a theme is not specified, the default OpenShift logo will be displayed for that theme.

> 2. Users might experience confusion with the introduction of new logo configuration options. The prevoious method represented by `CustomLogo` will be deprecated. Provide comprehensive documentation that will guide users through the transition. Include clear instructions about the changes and their benefits.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Users might experience confusion with the introduction of new logo configuration options. The previous method represented by `CustomLogo` will be deprecated. Provide comprehensive documentation that will guide users through the transition. Include clear instructions about the changes and their benefits.
```

#### FileReferenceSource
- `from`: Specifies the source type of the file reference. Allowed value is `ConfigMap`.
- `configMap`: Contains the ConfigMap sourcing details, such as the name of the ConfigMap and the key for the file. The ConfigMap must exist in the `openshift-config` namespace.

#### ConfigMapFileReference
- `name`: The name of the ConfigMap containing the custom logo file. Must consist of lowercase alphanumeric characters, `-`, or `.`, and must start and end with an alphanumeric character. Maximum length is 253 characters.
- `key`: The key inside the ConfigMap that references the logo file. Must consist of alphanumeric characters, dashes (`-`), underscores (`_`), and periods (`.`). Must end with a valid file extension (2 to 5 letters) and have a maximum length of 253 characters.

## Test Plan

Provide tests as part of the console logos implementation and verify that they are shown in the UI. The following tests will be added:
 - Unit tests for API
 - Unit and E2E tests for console-operator
 - E2E tests for console

#### Deprecated Feature

> The current custom logo field in `customization.customLogo` is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Users are encouraged to transition to the new custom logos configuration that supports light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon.

Reviewer 3: Do we actually plan to remove it? I'd leave that out for now.

```suggestion
The current custom logo field in `customization.customLogo` is deprecated. Users are encouraged to transition to the new custom logos configuration that supports light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon.
```

---
title: custom-logos
authors:
  - "@cajieh"
reviewers:
  - "@jhadvig "
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@everettraven"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2025-02-11
last-updated: 2025-02-11
---

# Custom Logos

## Summary

> The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console was upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console was upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on light or dark mode. As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both themes.
```
Can we just say either "both themes" or "both modes"?

> Add the ability to specify custom logos to support light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Patternfly 6 adds the ability to specify custom logos to support light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon.
```
I am not sure this is correct here but this sentence needs a subject.

## Background info

> The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console was upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on the mode (light or dark). As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console was upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on light or dark mode. As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes. 
```

> To address this, we need to allow users to add custom logos for both the masthead and favicon that are compatible with light and dark themes. This ensures that the logos are always visible and aesthetically pleasing, regardless of the theme mode.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To address this, we need to allow users to add custom logos compatible with light and dark themes for both the masthead and favicon. This ensures that the logos are always visible and aesthetically pleasing, regardless of the theme mode.
```

The custom logos feature will enable users to specify different logos for the masthead and favicon based on the theme mode. This will involve exposing a new API endpoint to support custom logos for both light and dark themes.

## Motivation

> The existing OKD and OpenShift logos are designed for a dark masthead background and include white text, making them less effective in a light theme. To ensure logos remain visible and visually appealing in both light and dark themes, users need the ability to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that adapt to the theme mode. To support this, a new API endpoint will be introduced, allowing users to specify different logos for light and dark themes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The existing OKD and OpenShift logos are designed for a dark masthead background and include white text, making them ineffective in a light theme. To ensure logos remain visible and visually appealing in both light and dark themes, users need the ability to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that adapt to the theme mode. To support this, a new API endpoint will be introduced, allowing users to specify different logos for light and dark themes.
```

I would replace less effective with ineffective.

### User Stories

* As an OpenShift web console user, I want to be able to add different custom logos for light and dark theme modes in the masthead and favicon.

### Goals

> This feature should allow users to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that are compatible with both light and dark theme modes in the OpenShift web console.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This feature will allow users to add custom logos for the masthead and favicon that are compatible with both light and dark themes in the OpenShift web console.
```
I would say use will instead of should since this is the intended outcome.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### API Design Details

> The configuration for custom logos will include support for both masthead and favicon types, with separate files for light and dark themes:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The configuration for custom logos will include support for both masthead and favicon types with separate files for light and dark themes:
```

```yaml
customLogos:
  - type: Masthead
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: logo-light.svg
          name: masthead-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: logo-dark.svg
          name: masthead-logo-dark
  - type: Favicon
    themes:
      - type: Light
        file:
          key: favicon-light.png
          name: favicon-logo-light
      - type: Dark
        file:
          key: favicon-dark.png
          name: favicon-logo-dark
```

### Workflow Description

├── spec
│   ├── customization
│       ├── customLogos
│           ├── type
│           ├── themes
│               ├── type
│               ├── file
│                   ├── key
│                   ├── name
└── ...

### API Extensions

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

> 1. Users could set both the `CustomLogoFile` and `CustomLogos` APIs. The `CustomLogos` API configuration will take precedence over the old `CustomLogoFile` field.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Users could set both the `CustomLogoFile` and `CustomLogos` APIs, and the `CustomLogos` API configuration will take precedence over the old `CustomLogoFile` field.
```

> 2. Each of the Console supported themes can be configured individually by setting either the Light or Dark theme type or by applying a default theme to all supported themes using the Default theme type. If the Default theme type is set along with a specific Dark or Light theme, the specific theme setting will override the default one.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Each of the Console supported themes can be configured individually by setting either the Light or Dark theme type, or by applying a default theme to all supported themes using the Default theme type. If the Default theme type is set along with a specific Dark or Light theme, the specific theme setting will override the default one.
```

> 4. Users might experience confusion with the introduction of new logo configuration options, especially if they are familiar with using previous method, represented by the `CustomLogo` field, which will be deprecated. Provide a comprehensive documentation that guide users through the transition. Include clear instructions about the changes and their benefits.

Reviewer 5: Should this be 3?

> 4. Users might experience confusion with the introduction of new logo configuration options, especially if they are familiar with using previous method, represented by the `CustomLogo` field, which will be deprecated. Provide a comprehensive documentation that guide users through the transition. Include clear instructions about the changes and their benefits.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
4. Users might experience confusion with the introduction of new logo configuration options. The prevoious method represented by `CustomLogo` will be deprecated. Provide comprehensive documentation that will guide users through the transition. Include clear instructions about the changes and their benefits.
```

### Drawbacks

N/A

### Attributes Description

#### customLogos
- `type`: Enumerate which specifies the type of custom logo. Available custom logo types are `Masthead` and `Favicon`.
- `themes`: A list of themes for which the custom logo is defined.

#### themes
- `type`: Enumerate which specifies the type of theme. Available theme types are `Light`, `Dark` and `Default`.
- `file`: Contains the file details for the custom logo.

#### file
- `key`: The key or path to the custom logo file.
- `name`: The name of the ConfigMap containing the custom logo file.

## Test Plan

Provide tests as part of the console `CustomLogos` implementation and verify that it was shown in the UI. The following tests will be added:
 - Unit tests for API
 - Unit and E2E tests for console-operator
 - E2E tests for console

## Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

> The current custom logo field in `customization.customLogo` is deprecated and will be removed at some point in the future. Users are encouraged to transition to the new custom logos configuration that supports light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon. The new custom logos feature also includes support for a default theme for all unspecified themes.

Reviewer 5: Is it possible to say deprecated with a future release? I think it sounds a little more concrete than at some point in the future. It would make it consistent with what we use across the docs too.

> The current custom logo field in `customization.customLogo` is deprecated and will be removed at some point in the future. Users are encouraged to transition to the new custom logos configuration that supports light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon. The new custom logos feature also includes support for a default theme for all unspecified themes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The current custom logo field in `customization.customLogo` is deprecated and will be removed at some point in the future. Users are encouraged to transition to the new custom logos configuration that supports light and dark themes for the masthead and favicon. The new custom logos feature also includes support for a default theme for all unspecified themes.
```

---
title: custom-logos
authors:
  - "@cajieh"
reviewers:
  - "@jhadvig "
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@everettraven"
  - "@JoelSpeed"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2025-02-11
last-updated: 2025-04-11
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CONSOLE-4448
---

# Console Customization Logos

## Summary

The OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console was upgraded to PatternFly 6. In PatternFly 6, the masthead color changes based on light or dark theme mode. As a result, a single custom logo may not be suitable for both theme modes.

This proposal is to add the ability to specify custom logos to support light and dark theme modes for the masthead and favicon in the Console UI.

![Light theme mode](images/light-theme-mode-logo.png)

![Dark theme mode](images/dark-theme-mode-logo.png)

> 

Author: TODO: These images would be updated.

Reviewer 6: ![bananas](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1f732814-dd01-41bd-ba53-4dc85c2a4aab)
![kiwis](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/172b4d9b-16db-4a4c-86af-a96ff662aaca)
